[music playing]
NARRATOR: A splash of
blue floating in a
sea of cold and darkness.
Once, this was the center
of the universe
and humans were alone.
Now, science is convinced
that others
are out there somewhere.
Giant ears scan the heavens,
searching for a needle in the
cosmic haystack.
But is the proof we seek right
here in our backyards?
Millions of people over
thousands of years say they've
seen metallic disks
in our skies.
Thousands more claim
close encounters
with strange beings.
Animals are bloodlessly
harvested by seemingly
invisible forces, and
for unknown reasons.
Intricate agroglyphs appear
mysteriously, the handiwork of
unseen artists, and a solemn
face stares at us from the
surface of Mars, as if watching
for a number of
comprehension, a possible sign
that we might finally be ready
for the next step.
Science, the government, and the
press insist there is no
evidence of UFOs or
an alien presence.
Yet people all over the planet
seem to sense otherwise.
It's as Aldous Huxley once
wrote, facts do not cease to
exist merely because
they're ignored.
In these programs, we intend
to do what scientists and
others won't do.
Look at the evidence,
the best evidence.
[music playing]
NARRATOR: Well, we just started
making these things,
and this was an opportunity at
this exposition to show them.
We thought it would fit in very
nicely, and we thought
it'd fit in with the program.
NARRATOR: Science in journalism
may not take UFOs
seriously, but the subject gets
plenty of respect from
the world of commerce.
UFO conventions are held
somewhere almost weekly, from
Los Angeles to Las Vegas, to
Eureka Springs, Arkansas, all
over the world.
And most come complete with
flying saucer supermarkets,
where assortments
of outer space
merchandise are for sale.
NARRATOR: We're going to be-- we
are raffling off this whole
tape set, so if you
fill that out.
NARRATOR: See, we have
them with the pearls
and everything else.
NARRATOR: T-shirts, hats,
videos, bumper stickers, and
board games.
Mother ships bedecked with magic
crystals, glow in the
dark planets, alien masks,
and alien models.
Alien abduction protection
kits.
NARRATOR: Creates
a disturbance in
the magnetic field.
NARRATOR: Alien Christmas cards,
alien head pillows,
alien hand puppets,
and dissected
alien children's toys.
Bald, bug-eyed aliens are
seemingly everywhere these
days, in our movies, and TV
programs, in books and
magazines, and comic strips.
In advertising.
American Express, don't leave
your planet without it.
Newspapers sell UFO
fishing lures.
Las Vegas casinos
offer UFO bingo.
More than money is
at work here.
In the face of persistent scorn
and decades of official
ridicule, interest in UFOs
appears to be growing.
Don Ecker is an editor for UFO
Magazine, and also hosts a
weekly coast to coast radio
show, UFOs Tonight.
NARRATOR: In the last 10 years,
once again, there has
been a reemergence of interest
among the American public, and
slowly but surely, various media
outlets are taking a
closer look at what, in
fact, is going on.
NARRATOR: UFO conventions
aren't held for the sole
purpose of selling baubles
or booklets,
or space age religion.
Most are sponsored by serious
minded organizations, like
MUFON, the Mutual UFO
Network, which has
thousands of members worldwide.
Convention delegates typically
share new findings, or debate
the veracity of UFO cases,
theories, and witnesses.
NARRATOR: Our group is a
scientific organization, and
we have 75 consultants.
All have doctorates in their
own fields of expertise.
There are over 40 of our
consultants here at this
symposium, and these are
professional people.
Academics.
But you wouldn't know that
from readings or watching
media reports.
Many UFO gatherings permit a
wide spectrum of persons to
attend, and to sell their
wares or services.
Everything from crystals
to aura
photos, to fortune tellers.
Subsequent media coverage of
UFO conferences usually
focuses on the oddball
elements,
whatever is most colorful.
And the serious research
gets left on the
editing room floor.
NARRATOR: One of the attendees
was a woman who say she's 400
years old, and from
the planet Venus.
Another woman says she was
instructed by her space alien
brothers to undergo breast
implant surgery.
And a man selling tapes to Earth
vortex sites claims that
the Tri-lateral Commission has
signed a secret treaty to
enslave the world.
NARRATOR: Sensational claims
made by ubiquitous supermarket
tabloids also make it tough
for ufologists to be taken
seriously by reporters.
Few mainstream journalists want
their work to be equated
with the occasionally humorous
but overtly ridiculous subject
matter of the tabloids.
Space alien snatch bowler just
as he completes a 300 game.
Martians here to steal
our frogs.
Girl gives birth to
52 UFO babies.
ET political hobnobbers
meet with all
manner of public figures.
It's no accident that aliens
and UFOs appear so often in
the tabloids.
The already popular weekly World
News confirms that its
sales jump every time it has,
quote, the alien on its cover.
UFO stories in general
are sure fire stuff.
For a reporter trying to read
through the deluge of patently
ridiculous material is
a daunting task.
It's far easier to poke fun at
saucer nights in ET masks, or
stories about alien
ice cream junkies.
Every outrageous fantasy, every
make believe headline
plays directly into the hands
of those who don't want the
subject taken seriously.
NARRATOR: Journalists apparently
are leery of
touching the subject.
What they have been told for
decades is the truth is
there's nothing to it.
There's nothing to the
UFO phenomenon.
Yet the preponderance of
evidence is on the other side.
Anyone who takes about one hour
to review some of the
available evidence cannot come
away without the firm
conviction that there is
something out there.
[music playing]
NARRATOR: UFOs are seen far more
often than blue moons,
and by some of the most famous
people of this century.
More on that in a moment.
Sheffield, England, 1962.
Ramey Air Force Base,
Puerto Rico, 1967.
Brazil, 1978.
California, 1990.
The Hawaiian Islands, 1974.
This drawing shows what
witnesses reportedly saw
flying over France in 1952.
Nearly identical Saturn like
shapes have been captured by
photographers the world
over, off the coast
of Brazil in 1958.
Again in Brazil during 1976.
Thailand, 1973.
Sicily, 1987.
Japan, 1989.
This famous photo was snapped
by farmers in Mcminnville,
Oregon, 1950.
Four years later, a military
pilot in Europe photographed
what seems to be its
near double.
This whirling burr like
craft was spotted over
California in 1964.
25 years later, Russian
witnesses
described the same craft.
People all over the
planet have seen
remarkably similar objects.
-It was dark, there was three
or four of us running along.
All of the sudden
it was daylight.
Just bright than all get out,
but you could see over yonder
that it was dark.
-A same bright red color, and it
wasn't blinking or nothing.
It was just like a
ball of light.
-What I saw was these balls of
light traveling from the west
to the east, all the
way across the sky.
-It was just a bright, bright,
bright, light.
Yeah.
And it would dim, and get
brighter, and it would just
stop and hover sometimes.
-Did you see that?
You know, everybody's,
did you see that?
Everybody saw it, but nobody
had an explanation.
NARRATOR: UFOs don't seem to
know that they don't exist,
nor do they seem to care.
They keep popping up in apparent
defiance of science
and the media, which is the main
reason public interest in
the topic remains high, and why
the public doesn't seem to
buy the official explanations.
Opinion polls consistently show
that well over half of
all Americans believe UFOs are
real, possibly alien craft.
In 1993, a non scientific survey
by USA Today revealed
that an astounding 91% of its
readers believe Earth has been
visited by extraterrestrials.
While there is no central
collection point for all UFO
data, much information is
available today through
computer hook ups.
John Komar runs an international
computer network
for MUFON, and says he's
received 15,000 communications
in 2 and 1/2 years.
-Input we get is worldwide.
Information we get are from
researchers, scientists,
astronomers.
Information that would take an
individual years to obtain is
at their fingertips.
NARRATOR: Komar, who has worked
for a major airline the
past 26 years, is one of an
estimated 20 million Americans
who say they've seen a UFO.
Contrary to the stereotype of
UFO witnesses as attention
seekers or wackos, most
witnesses are considered
stable, and are generally
reluctant to
discuss their sightings.
Even government studies estimate
only 2% of reported
sightings come from people
with mental problems.
Still, unfounded perceptions
about flying saucer sightings
persist, discouraging some of
the best witnesses from
telling anyone about
what they've seen.
-Pilots are really reluctant to
discuss any UFO sightings
in public, or to go
public with it.
NARRATOR: But they see them?
-But they do see them, yes.
Quite a lot.
One researcher estimates about
20,000 cases of pilots seeing
UFOs during flights.
-The sighting that we saw was
just right up over the tallest
tree there.
NARRATOR: Taylor Blair of
Memphis is one such pilot.
He's been flying since
he was 18 years old.
Everything from B29s
to small Cessnas.
What he and eight other people
saw zipping around over his
backyard one night was
unlike anything he
had ever seen before.
-We saw four huge lights that
looked like, about the color
of railroad flares, and we
estimated that the height was
about 6,000 feet.
My wife, in the meantime, had
come into the telephone and
called the airport, called the
approach control people, and
told them what we were saying.
And they said, well, they had a
radar fix on something, and
they had dispatched
a helicopter,
police helicopter out.
And by the time she came back to
tell us, the helicopter was
over the backyard also,
apparently trying to climb,
but whatever it was outclimbed
him, and disappeared.
NARRATOR: Subsequent news
articles suggested the object
was a weather balloon, but Blair
and the other witnesses,
including other pilots,
disagree, because they say the
four lights merged into one,
and then zoomed off at an
incredible speed.
That would have been some
weather balloon.
-You can't estimate a speed or
anything, that it traveled at?
-No, I can't.
Pretty fast.
-Thousands of miles an hour?
-Faster than I ever traveled on
an airplane, I'll say that.
NARRATOR: In addition to vast
numbers of pilots, thousands
of police officers have
seen, chased, or
been chased by UFOs.
Veteran police officer Chuck
Woodworth and five others saw
a huge, brilliant UFO
in central Nevada.
-And we stopped the car to
look at it because the
movement of this light
was square.
It wasn't a gradual fall
or gradual rise.
It went straight up,
straight down, and
it made square corners.
It's a good possibility it is
something from somewhere else.
NARRATOR: Woodworth says he
passed on this information to
military authorities,
but to his knowledge
nothing was ever done.
This citing put him in some
rarefied company, not only
with pilots and police
officers, but also a
president or two.
Jimmy Carter once saw
a UFO, and even
filed a formal statement.
Ronald Reagan has had
two UFO sightings.
In one case he ordered
his pilot to try
and follow the object.
Britain's Prince Charles had a
UFO sighting while flying home
from a trip to the US.
The prince's countrymen, 2001
author and science writer
Arthur C. Clarke says he has
had six separate UFO
encounters.
Boxing great and devout Muslim
Muhammad Ali has seen a UFO.
Likewise for the king of rock
and roll, Elvis Presley.
Flamboyant guitarist Jimi
Hendrix claimed that a UFO
saved his life.
Actor William Shatner met plenty
of aliens on the Star
Trek series, but also claims to
have seen what he suspects
was an extraterrestrial
aircraft in real life.
So did Ray Walston, the actor
who played the title role in
the TV series, My Favorite
Martian.
The late John Lennon said he
watched a UFO fly over
Manhattan in the '70s.
Farah Fawcett, Ed Asner, Jill
Ireland, Phoebe Snow, Sheila
MacRae, Meredith MacRae, Stuart
Whitman, Lee Majors,
and Cliff Robertson are other
entertainers who have
reportedly seen flying
saucers.
Jackie Gleason told his friends
and family that he had
seen the preserved body of an
alien courtesy of his close
friend, then President
Richard Nixon.
It probably won't come as a
surprise that Shirley MacLaine
has seen UFOs, or that singer
Michael Jackson reportedly was
interested in building
a UFO landing pad.
But other names may seem out
of place in such company.
British statesman Winston
Churchill was so curious about
UFOs that he ordered a formal
study to be conducted.
Dictator Joseph Stalin did the
same in the Soviet Union in
the late 1940s.
Nazi leader Adolf Hitler was
so enamored of UFOs that he
ordered his engineers to design
a flying saucer like
secret weapon.
In the 1960s, future president
Gerald Ford was one of the
leading congressional voices
in calling for
hearings into UFOs.
Also in the '60s, United Nations
Secretary General U
Thant said that only the ongoing
Vietnam War was more
important to the world than
the mystery of UFOs.
Astronauts, astronomers,
physicists,
military officers, inventors.
People from every walk of life,
every income level and
education background, rural
and urban, have seen UFOs.
Kent Oram is a big city, highly
successful political
consultant who was run scores
of successful campaigns,
including those of Nevada's
governor, lieutenant governor,
and Attorney General.
Bradley Waddell is an assistant
fire chief and part
time rancher in a small
north Alabama town.
Both had unforgettable
sightings.
-And at the time I made a joke
to my wife, I mean, if you
were under the Starship
Enterprise, that's sort of
what it might look like.
And it was, I would say, it was
gigantic, and it was more
of a square shape, but it
was a lot of lights.
And so I had a pair of
binoculars in the back of my
Ram Charger, so I went
to get them.
We finally found them, and then
we looked up in the sky
and it was gone.
I mean, just flat gone.
NARRATOR: Waddell says he and
three other witnesses saw a
brightly lit UFO land in a
wooded area near his home.
-It was real huge, and it had
a lot of lights on it.
It had red and green lights, and
some white lights, and it
was real round.
And so we turned around and come
back, and go to sit there
and watch it, and it was gone.
There wasn't no sound,
no nothing.
There wasn't no lights,
no sound, no nothing.
Just, that's what it looked
like, was a flying saucer.
[music playing]
NARRATOR: An English scientist
once wrote, it's the customary
fate of new truths to begin
as heresies and end as
superstitions.
To modern mainstream science,
UFOs represent both heresy and
superstition.
In 1968, the late Dr. J. Allen
Hynek testified before
Congress that the legitimate
study of UFOs is
a scientific taboo.
It simply isn't done.
In Hynek's estimation, there
had never been a fair and
objective study of the UFO
phenomenon, at least none that
had ever been released to the
public, and little has changed
since then.
Modern scientists are all but
certain that intelligent life
exists elsewhere in
the universe.
The law of averages
almost demands it.
Billions of galaxies, each
containing billions of stars,
implies there could be untold
numbers of other
civilizations.
Societies far older than
our own, with greater
technological capabilities.
Astronomer and pop science
writer Dr. Carl Sagan
estimates there could be as many
as one million advanced
civilizations in our galaxy
alone, but Sagan is also one
of the most vocal critics
of the study of UFOs.
He and others dismiss UFO
sightings on the basis of
probabilities, and what we
know of mankind's own
technological limitations.
In other words, they use theory
to explain away data.
UFOs can't exist, therefore
they don't.
Any scientist that takes the
time to look at the data, and
the facts and the evidence
accepts the fact
that we have UFOs.
You have to have an open mind.
If you simply make the statement
there's nothing to
this thing and ignore it, people
like Carl Sagan, who's
a brilliant astrophysicist, he's
never bothered to read
the UFO material, and pretend
there's nothing there, so
don't bother me with
the facts.
NARRATOR: One example is Dr.
Sagan's 1993 foray into
alleged alien abductions.
Sagan is certainly qualified to
speak about astronomy, but
strayed far afield when, in an
article for Parade Magazine,
he flatly dismissed all
abduction reports as the
result of hallucinations, or
other mental disturbances.
Not only is Sagan lacking in
psychiatric expertise, he's
personally investigated
only a handful of
alleged abduction cases.
-Carl Sagan has what I call the
arrogance of ignorance.
He is a person who has enough
arrogance to believe that he
can answer the UFO and abduction
mystery through lack
of knowledge.
He does not know much about
the subject of UFOs, he
certainly doesn't know anything
about the subject of
abductions, other than what he's
read in debunking books.
Even though he had seven critics
to the article before
it was published absolutely
destroying his material, not
just on a theoretical
basis, but on a
factual basis as well.
All of these letters to him
before the article was
published were simply ignored.
NARRATOR: Dr. Sagan declined our
request for an interview,
but his disdain for ufology cuts
a wide swath in science,
and influences the views held by
other honest but uninformed
academicians.
-If anyone would bring in some
little green men and they
would run around on my
conference table, I would
consider that convincing.
See, but absent that kind of
physical evidence, I remain
very skeptical.
-To the extent that there
ever is any evidence or
documentation to be looked at,
it is looked at by scientists,
astronomers, scientists
of other types.
It's that in the vast majority
of the cases, there isn't
anything to study.
-None of the scientists who talk
about black holes have a
piece of a black hole either.
You might have noticed that.
That's part of the
problem with not
dealing with the evidence.
After, all we have 4,400
physical trace cases from 65
countries, last time
I checked.
Now, when people tell you
there's no evidence and then
ignore the physical trace cases,
I've had lab tests done
on dirt that's been affected by
the saucer compared to dirt
that wasn't affected.
There's some very concrete
and definite differences.
-If intelligent life out there
is found, that will be the
most important discovery in
the history of mankind.
Period.
NARRATOR: Astronomer Doug
Hall, like most of his
colleagues, would give almost
anything to be around when
contact with other intelligent
life is confirmed.
He just doesn't think it's going
to happen anytime soon,
and is certain there's
not a speck of
evidence related to UFOs.
-There is no evidence that
we have been visited.
The evidence just isn't there.
NARRATOR: There how much study
have you done on the topic?
I mean, how much of the data
have you looked at?
-I myself, that's not my actual
field of expertise, but
I've read a virtually all the
articles critically that have
dealt with it.
NARRATOR: If Doug Hall were to
read every scientific article
about UFOs that has been
published during the past 20
years, he wouldn't need
five minutes.
Simply put, there
have been none.
Scientific journals do not
publish articles about UFOs or
aliens, or anything that even
hints at such topics.
Science has already made up its
mind about these matters,
and no amount of new information
is going to change
this perception.
-There was a reception of 300
Ph.D. Astronomers in Victoria,
British Columbia, and somebody
announced that there was a UFO
outside the building.
Not one astronomer went
out to take a look.
It's just too big a risk
in their profession.
If an Astronomer, Ph.D.
astronomer actually saw a UFO,
and I know secretly they want
to, and then if they reported
that to an audience, they may be
cut off from their grants,
or they may risk the judgment
of their peers.
NARRATOR: Dr. O'Leary has had
personal experience with the
wrath of mainstream science, but
it didn't begin that way.
He started on a path that is
as mainstream as it gets, a
Ph.D. In astronomy from Cal
Berkeley, taught at Princeton
and at Cornell with Carl Sagan,
and was selected over
thousands of other applicants
by NASA for a
manned mission to Mars.
He too was skeptical UFOs, but
when O'Leary began to make
serious inquiries into the
topic, as well as into other
so-called pseudosciences,
he found himself
a scientific outcast.
-People like Randy the Magician,
even Carl Sagan, who
was a close colleague of mine
when I was at Cornell will
attempt to debunk
and discredit.
It's very kind of knee jerk,
emotional response, and it's
not befitting of a scientist.
Because after all, science is
supposed to be free and open
inquiry into the unknown, and
we scientists have tended to
forget that.
NARRATOR: The grants
may be the key.
Of the $140 billion dollars
spent each year on research in
the US, fully 1/2 comes from
the federal government.
It means that, if the government
doesn't want UFO
research to be done, it
simply won't be done.
And if it is done, it won't get
published anywhere that
professionals like Doug
Hall would be likely
to read about it.
-Galileo's colleagues refused to
look through his telescope
because they didn't believe it
could make things look bigger.
And in the 17th century, the
French Academy of Sciences
refused to believe meteorites
existed because rocks can't
fall out of the sky.
And so I think that's what's
happening right now with the
UFO phenomenon.
-The leading scientists have
gone out of their way to
attack ufology.
You know, it's been kind of
strange with the SETI stuff.
You know, they turned on the
instrumentation for that
microwave searching device.
They've gotten $100
million for 10
years worth of listening.
And in almost all the articles
about that, you'll find an
attack on UFOs.
What we're doing is science,
but not that UFO junk.
NARRATOR: Science is supposed to
represent the investigation
of the unexplained, not
the explanation of the
uninvestigated.
Today, mainstream science acts
almost like a religion.
Rigid, unyielding with its own
special rules, and rights, and
limitations.
Anything which falls outside
these rules of reality simply
can't exist.
-Don't worry about the
scientific community, because
science has become
the religion of
this period of time.
It is not science any longer.
It is theology.
It is what has replaced
theology.
NARRATOR: This means the study
of UFOs is largely left to
well meaning but sometimes
untrained, underfinanced
outsiders, such as UFO
organizations.
Many of these amateur
investigators, like mainstream
scientists, already have their
minds made up about UFOs, and
this only serves to further
lessen the credibility of UFO
research in the eyes of already
hostile scientists.
Most of this attitude seems to
flow from the government or,
more specifically, from the
military, which has a
longstanding, documentable
interest in ridiculing UFOs
and UFO researchers.
If the government controls the
research money, it controls
the research, and it has
repeatedly gone out of its way
to make certain that UFO studies
remain in the company
of fairy tales and Dr.
Seuss stories.
The question is why.
Those who argue UFOs might be
cultural byproducts induced by
movies, or books, or advertising
have difficulty
explaining how the same
phenomenon can be reported in
virtually every culture and
on every continent.
For example, in the late 1980s,
an estimated 10,000
Belgians reported seeing a
triangular UFO the size of a
football field over the period
of several months.
The Belgian Air Force tracked
the UFOs on radar, initiated
airborne chases, and launched
a formal study.
From 1983 until 1986, as many
as 9,000 witnesses in the
Hudson Valley region of New
York and Connecticut
reportedly saw a nearly
identical flying triangle,
along with huge aerial
boomerangs.
Several photos and videos of
the objects were captured.
In the southeastern US, the same
huge triangular mystery
craft has been seen by scores
of longtime residents dating
back to the '60s.
-We've seen planes, and
helicopters, and stuff.
They'd just be sitting still
and light, then all of a
sudden they just-- pew.
And then it'd be gone
plum out of sight.
Next thing you know,
just gone.
-It's just like it happened.
It looked like--
well, it looked like it was
just moving like that.
Saw it, it wasn't
going that fast.
The way it come over us, we
thought, we about decided it
stopped on us, nearly.
But it hadn't.
And then when it was
there, it was gone.
INTERVIEWER: Just like, poof.
-Yeah.
But it--
Now, we didn't see
it speed up.
We don't know what
happened to it.
We just didn't see it no more.
It's gone.
NARRATOR: Now, reports of this
same flying triangle are
surfacing in Africa.
Africa, Belgium, New
York, Alabama.
Four distinct cultures with
different influences.
Books and movies didn't make
them all see the same
thing in the sky.
What's more, the late Dr. Allen
Hynek in his book "Night
Siege," asserts that at least
100 other communities have
seen the same big triangle
since the mid 1970s.
It has been this way since the
beginning of recorded history.
UFO-like vehicles are found
in ancient cave drawings.
There are numerous references in
the Bible which could just
as easily be attributed to
aliens as to angels, including
the prophet Ezekiel's encounter
with a burning
bronze wheel from the sky and
its four otherworldly
passengers.
Ancient Egyptian, Chinese, and
Mayans reported flying
machines and odd beings
very similar
to modern UFO sightings.
Australian Aborigines and
indigenous American tribes
tell similar tales of beings
and craft from the sky.
The Greeks and Romans
called them
flying shields or chariots.
In the Middle Ages, Irish
scribes wrote of demon
airships and the strange
beings who flew them.
Wood carvings from 1500
Switzerland record unusual
balls of light, seemingly
controlled by some
intelligence, and hundreds of
strange airships were reported
in newspapers all across the
US during America's first
great UFO wave.
That in the 1890s, years before
dirigibles or the
Wright brothers' first flight.
-I would not exclude
categorically that we had a
high technological civilization
on it.
Why not, there is still the
story of Atlantis and all
these things.
But even they had a high
technological civilization in
the past, this, again,
does not exclude the
extra-terrestrials, because
anyhow, we have clear
writings, even with interviews
where mankind asks their
teacher, where did
you come from?
And the answer is, we came
from the universe.
NARRATOR: UFOs have come
in all sizes and
shapes over the centuries.
Cigars, disks, fireballs,
footballs, barbells, boxes,
diamonds, walnuts
and wash tubs.
We can't say for sure how many
sightings there have been, but
it's likely that 90%
of them are nothing
to get excited about.
Meteors, for example, are
sometimes mistaken for UFOs,
as this one was back in 1972.
Some clouds look like UFOs.
Atmospheric phenomena, including
ball lightning, can
also be mistaken for
flying saucers.
Weather balloons, too, and
conventional aircraft.
The most common UFO culprit is
probably the planet Venus,
along with other stars and
planets, according to many
astronomers.
While it's true that 9 of 10
UFO sightings are probably
mistakes, it's also true
that 9 out of 10 are
never reported at all.
The main reason for that
is fear of ridicule.
-Just this perfectly straight
line, and it was going too
fast for anything we've got.
NARRATOR: J.B. Langley has spent
his entire life in the
Appalachian Mountains.
He and nearly every other member
of his family have seen
UFOs, which they called
ghost lights, as
far back as the 1930s.
They haven't tried
to get rich, they
haven't asked for attention.
In fact, the Langleys have been
afraid to talk about what
they've seen until now.
-Sort of like everybody knows
everybody, and you get to
going around, spreading rumors
like that, they'll
say, well, he's nuts.
And pretty soon, you wouldn't
have anybody to talk to.
But you know what you see,
and you know when you're
imagining it or not.
And I know some of the
stuff I've seen, I
didn't imagine it.
NARRATOR: Langley's fears
are well founded.
If you see a UFO, you
must be unbalanced.
At least, that's a prevalent
view, even for
highly credible witnesses.
In 1979, a decorated Tennessee
police lieutenant, along with
seven other officers and 12
other witnesses watched two
UFOs perform incredible
maneuvers for several minutes.
A psychologist later surmised
that it was all in their
heads, brought on by stress.
Pilot John Lear, who has held
every flight rating, and his
father invented the Learjet,
says he was fired from a
charter company after admitting
his interest in UFOs.
Airline veteran John
Komar says such
fears are not uncommon.
I mean, would an airline
actually fire someone who
reported one of these things?
-Quite possibly.
NARRATOR: A more practical
problem in getting people to
report UFOs is that no one seems
interested in taking
such reports.
UFO organizations will listen,
but few people in official
positions want to be bothered.
Just try it sometime.
Call your local airport control
tower to report a UFO,
and see what happens.
They simply don't
want to hear it.
Most police agencies will listen
to UFO callers, but not
because they want information
on the citing.
Many times they keep the caller
on the line long enough
to determine if he or she
might be unstable.
And military authorities are
adamant in their statements
that they have no interest
whatsoever in UFOs.
Air Force spokesmen will tell
the caller that they stopped
taking UFO reports in 1969, a
claim which, as we'll learn,
is far from credible.
Most people trace the beginning
of the modern UFO
era to an Idaho pilot and
businessman named Kenneth
Arnold, whose sighting of nine
silvery UFOs in June 1947
spawned the term flying saucers,
and kicked off a
nationwide UFO frenzy.
What neither Arnold nor the rest
of the world knew at the
time was that the US military
was already conducting full
scale secret studies of
the so-called saucers.
After all, UFO sightings had
been common in the final
months of World War II.
Foo-Fighters, they
were called.
The Allies thought they
were Nazi weapons.
The Nazis, we learned later,
thought they were ours.
When the odd vehicle started
popping up in the US following
the war, it became readily
apparent that
something was going on.
Today, military officials
laughingly insist that UFOs
are largely imaginary,
not a threat at all.
But it was a far different story
four decades ago, before
the alleged cover up was
fully implemented.
As early as 1948, top secret
studies by the Army and FBI
had concluded that whatever was
flying around was real,
metallic, capable of incredible
maneuvers, and of
unknown origin.
Subsequent studies by the Air
Force concluded matter of
factly that the craft were most
likely extraterrestrial,
but the public wasn't allowed
to hear those conclusions.
-There was a report
issued in 1949.
Classified document then,
stating that the Air Force had
by that point in time,
investigated some x number of
citing cases.
x number of UFO cases.
80% remained unexplained in
1949, yet they were telling
the public at that time, in
public press releases dated
the same month, that only 10%
remained unexplained.
Flat out lied to the press.
Why did they do that?
NARRATOR: It is a question that
is still being asked.
Why?
Whatever the answer, the
pentagon's approach to UFOs
changed, encouraged by
recommendations from the CIA,
which urged that UFOs be
stripped of their aura of
mystery, lest some foreign
enemy exploit them.
From the early '50s on, military
studies of UFOs were,
in the view of many,
little more than
public relations exercises.
-Yes, there has been a clear cut
solid, strong, I'll call
it propaganda effort
of disinformation,
right from the start.
NARRATOR: In the ensuing
decades, hundreds of former
military personnel have come
forward to tell of their UFO
experiences, and of the evidence
they viewed with
their own eyes.
-We succeeded in getting,
collecting information
probably two or three times a
week, and some of the cases,
of the contact cases were
quite spectacular.
They were seen to descend,
and land on the ice.
They were seen to take off
from the ice and snow.
They were seen to land in the
water up there, the open
water, and descend underwater.
Others were seen coming
out of water.
-They were traveling at such
rates of speed, the sweep on
the radar comes around
every five seconds.
The rate of speed was so great
we could not-- it disappeared
off the radar before we
could get up, check
the speed on them.
NARRATOR: How fast is that?
-Well, it was well over 2,00.
Well over.
NARRATOR: This is back
in the '50s?
-This is back in a '50s, yeah.
-The next morning the Alaskan
Air Command issued a general
order to all personnel and
civilian personnel, all
military and civilian personnel,
a gag order in
essence, that what you thought
you saw and heard on the
previous day to this directive,
you did not see,
and you did not hear.
And it did not happen.
NARRATOR: Critics insist that
a secret of this magnitude
could never be kept, and that
even if it were, the Freedom
of Information Act would allow
access to all relevant
government documents.
In reality, this isn't much
of a secret anymore.
Too many people have testified
about their personal
involvement in UFO intelligence
operations.
The question is, why have so few
people paid attention to
those stories?
As for the Freedom of
Information Act, it's been
invaluable in forcing the
release of thousands of UFO
documents, but even its greatest
supporters admit that
the most sensitive information
is still being withheld.
Those documents which
are released are
often heavily censored.
Many files are never
released at all.
The very existence of other
records is falsely denied.
-You're dealing with the
biggest story of the
millennium.
Certainly worthy of the
attention of the news media,
historians, and scientists,
and a lot of other people,
namely that the planet is indeed
being visited, and what
the best evidence has
been kept secret
successfully for 45 years.
NARRATOR: On New Year's Eve
1978, a TV crew flying between
New Zealand and Australia
captured some amazing, if
bumpy, footage of a bright
object which seemingly danced
around the plane.
Debunkers dismissed the footage,
saying it showed,
depending on the critic, a
planet, a meteor, a plane,
headlights, a lighthouse,
moonlight on cabbage patches,
and other unsupported excuses.
Even though radar operators
confirmed it to be a solid,
moving airborne object.
Similar footage and photos
have been captured
all over the world.
Guatemala, 1976.
Southern England, 1973.
Italy, 1960.
Belgium, 1977.
It is abundantly clear from the
photos and witnesses that
the UFO phenomenon is not an
American mystery, it's a
worldwide mystery.
Saucers, disks, cigars and
fireballs have been seen in
virtually every nation on the
planet, and have been studied
by numerous governments.
But like the USA, most
governments are not very
forthcoming about
UFO information.
British writer Tim Good, who's
bestselling book "Above Top
Secret," details UFO cases
worldwide is convinced there
is cooperation between
governments in
maintaining the cover up.
-Many governments haven't the
faintest idea what's going on.
They have no need to know, and
they haven't been filled in on
the full picture by any
of the major world
powers, in my opinion.
So, it's not a world wide cover
up to that extent, but
there is an interchange of
information, but at an above
top secret level.
INTERVIEWER: You're
certain of that?
-I'm absolutely certain
of it, yes.
NARRATOR: Good's contention is
supported by Robert Dean, a
military intelligence officer
assigned to NATO headquarters
in Europe during the '60s.
Dean says he personally read
an extensive report on UFOs
prepared for NATO allies.
-The conclusions were basically
in four parts.
One that the human race and
the planet Earth has been
under a detailed survey of
some kind of by several--
and this was the part that
I found exciting--
several high technology,
extraterrestrial civilizations
for a long period of time.
This research, this survey, this
program, whatever it is,
had been going on not only
maybe for centuries.
Maybe for thousands of years.
NARRATOR: Documents obtained
from US government files make
it clear that the American
military has a long reach when
it comes to UFOs.
In May 1986, for example,
the Brazilian Air Force
encountered at least 20 UFOs in
three distinct formations.
So many UFOs that their radar
scopes were saturated.
This self-described close
encounter was kept under
wraps, with the official
reports ending up in
Washington.
June, 1980.
Peruvian jets had two encounters
with UFOs and fired
on one object.
The shots had no effect, and
the UFOs out ran the jets.
Pentagon documents show the
Department of Defense got the
files from a source in the
Peruvian Air Force.
Bolivia, August, 1979.
An object from space three times
the size of a basketball
was found on a farm.
Film of the object was quickly
set not to the Bolivian
government, but to Washington.
Finland, 1982.
Belgium, 1990.
Nepal, 1968.
Ghana, 1987.
All of these foreign UFO
incidents somehow found their
way into the files of American
intelligence agencies, but few
were reported publicly.
[chanting]
Cooperation from friendly
countries is one thing, but
what about our enemies
or former enemies?
How do they handle the UFO
matter, and is there any
cooperation between
them and us?
[singing]
NARRATOR: Mother Russia is
singing a new tune these days.
The Berlin Wall has crumbled
and the Iron Curtain has
parted, allowing the Russian
people to experiment with a
free market economy, and
allowing the rest of us a
glimpse into a world that was,
by and large, sealed off from
the outside for decades.
Even the KGB be has opened some
of its files to Western
researchers and journalists.
But what do Russians
know about UFOs?
It was assumed by Western
ufologists that the Soviets
were experiencing the same type
of UFO encounters as the
rest of the world, but isolated
incidents were all
outsiders heard about.
As tensions cooled and dialogue
began between the
east and the west, the UFO issue
was publicly breached.
In a 1989 issue of the magazine
"Soviet Military
Review," Russian military
leaders argued in favor of an
ongoing exchange of UFO
information with the West.
In the view of the authors,
without such an exchange, a
UFO might one day accidentally
trigger a nuclear exchange
between the superpowers on the
assumption that the UFO was an
enemy missile.
The article acknowledged that
UFOs were tracked by the
defense systems of the USSR, and
applied that the same must
be true in the US.
Shortly thereafter, Soviet
president Mikhail Gorbachev,
in response to repeated
statements by then President
Ronald Reagan told Western
reporters that
he agreed with Reagan.
If the world were ever
threatened by outside powers,
our two nations would stand
side by side in
the defense of Earth.
Reagan alluded to this potential
threat in five
separate public speeches,
including an address to the
United Nations.
-I've often wondered, what
if all of us in the world
discovered that we were
threatened by an outer power
from outer space, from
another planet?
Wouldn't we all of a sudden find
that we didn't have any
differences between us at all?
We were all human beings,
citizens of the world?
And wouldn't we come
together to fight
that particular threat?
NARRATOR: In November, 1989,
Soviet attitudes on UFOs
became abundantly clear.
The official news agency TASS
reported on the alleged
landing of an alien ship in
the city of Voronezh, a 10
hour train ride north
of Moscow.
According to TASS, tall aliens
and a robot exited the space
ship, walked around the
park, and then left.
The story was reported in the
"New York Times," "Wall Street
Journal," and on network news.
None of these major media
outlets had their own
reporters on the scene, so most
chose the approach they
normally take with UFO story.
-Earlier tonight, the CBS
Evening News with Dan Rather
included a report about
the alleged
alien landing at Voronezh.
Rather, Riley commented on
the Soviet claims about
10-foot-tall aliens walking
around a Russian park.
The CBS newsman added,
don't believe
everything you read in TASS.
NARRATOR: Within days, the
Voronezh story assumed almost
surreal proportions.
American headlines chortled
about pinhead aliens.
Followup stories claimed that
the only witnesses to the
landing were young children,
and because the tall aliens
described were different from
the usual short, bug eyed
variety Americans hear about,
it was smugly assumed the
Russians must be wrong.
So much superfluous information
was added to media
accounts that it took only
a few days to generally
discredit the entire event.
Prominent astrophysicist Jacques
Vallee was one of few
Westerners to personally
investigate the case by
meeting with Russian
sources firsthand.
-In this Voronezh, there were
many cases, not just the case
that made the newspapers.
Not just the case that was
recorded by TASS with the
school students.
The witnesses were
not just kids.
They were 18, 19-year-old
kids.
Very articulate.
And obviously, they had
seen something.
There were physical
traces there.
But there were many other cases,
over 1,000 witnesses in
all in the city of Voronezh.
Voronezh is a large city.
It's over a million people.
What they showed me was the
film, the physical evidence.
They told me about the cases
in which, for example, an
object hovered near a nuclear
power plant in Voronezh and a
beam from that object melted
the asphalt there.
And that's what they
are studying now.
NARRATOR: The story Americans
read was much different from
what the witnesses say
happened at Voronezh.
Inside the USSR, the incident
helped unleash a long pent up
interest in the UFO topic.
An interest that, by decree,
had been dormant until
Glasnost and Perestroika.
Suddenly, Russians were flocking
to newsstands to buy
the same sort of UFO tabloids
that Americans buy, filled
with lurid, sensational stories
about nasty aliens and
their dubious intentions.
At the same time, UFO
organizations, including
respected scientists and
military officials, were free
to openly discuss UFO
cases and issues.
But still, little was made
public about what the Soviet
government might know.
In March, 1993, our
investigative team traveled to
Moscow to meet with current
and former government and
military officials concerning
UFO files.
[speaking russian]
NARRATOR: The journey was
undertaken during a period of
dramatic political and social
upheaval in Russia, but few
events could be as dramatic or
as important as what was
uncovered about UFOs
and human knowledge
of the alien presence.
Russian physicist Nikolai
Kapranov, a national security
advisor to the Soviet
parliament, spent months
making the crucial contacts
with sources who would not
otherwise be available to
Westerners, and who almost
certainly would never been
accessible to Western
journalists.
Kapranov had heard rumblings
about UFO studies over the
years, but he was far from
being a believer.
That is, until he started asking
questions of people in
high places.
-More and more, I started
to think that this is
something for real.
And there are facts, and I've
seen some materials one can't,
you know, just-- just drop.
And what I learned about the UFO
is that they're certainly
for real, and that the UFO is
a one fragment of a very
diverse and strong phenomenon.
The military people are looking
at that very seriously.
NARRATOR: With Kapranov's
assistance, our team succeeded
in making contact with a
previously hidden echelon of
UFO researchers, dedicated
scientists who had pursued
their interest in alien visitors
during the darkest
days of communism, and whose
findings have never before
seen the light of day.
A government biologist who
analyzes soil samples from UFO
landing sites.
A Moscow professor who has
secretly directed a discrete
organization of high level
scientists and military
personnel interested in UFOs.
An author and physicist who
began studying UFOs in the
'50s and who became a non-person
when he refused to
quit talking and writing
about the subject.
An engineer in the Russian SDI
program who asserts the Soviet
military long ago determined
that UFOs were interplanetary
and who says UFO data has been
incorporated into Russian beam
weapon research.
And a shadowy man who currently
heads the ongoing
Ministry of Defense study
of UFOs and aliens.
This man is Boris Sokolov a
retired Russian kernel colonel
from a distinguished
military family.
In 1978, Sokolov was given what
seemed like an unusual
assignment.
Orders were handed down from
the Ministry of Defense to
every unit in the vast Soviet
military empire.
Every UFO sighting was to
be fully investigated.
All of these reports were to
be funneled to Sokolov's
command for analysis.
[speaking russian]
First, an order was given to
those pilots to chase the UFO
and to shoot it.
There were 40 episodes
like this, like that.
NARRATOR: Hundreds of Sokolov's
most intriguing
cases were compiled into
this thick volume.
Although much of the data is
still being evaluated, it
appears the Russians accumulated
a mammoth amount
of information about UFOs.
The assumption that these craft
were from somewhere
else, perhaps outer space,
became a foregone conclusion.
The importance of these
revelations is
difficult to overstate.
In Russia of all places, a
country still experimenting
with democracy, it is now
permissible for former
military men and government
scientists to admit a
longstanding involvement in
clandestine UFO research.
In America, the cradle of
freedom, it's another story.
The Pentagon, CIA, FBI, and
other intelligence agencies
deny any interest in UFOs,
although their own files
indicate otherwise.
Mainstream science says UFOs
can't be true, so they won't
be studied.
Big time journalism won't
touch this story with a
10-foot typewriter.
None of this matters.
UFOs refuse to go away, and no
amount of official put downs
will change this.
Regular people all over the
world almost instinctively
recognize that something
is happening.
We all share a common
question.
What is going on?
-I really would like to know.
I really would.
And I really would like
everybody to know.
-Oh, I'd absolutely like
to know what it was.
-I know just as sure as I'm
sitting here that there's--
there's too much evidence
here and out there.
-And hopefully, at some point,
there will be outrage to the
point where people will begin
demanding of their elected
representatives, just what
the hell is going on.
-And we have enough information
to go by where we
don't even have to wait for the
government to come forth
with information or
disinformation.
We already have a lot
of information
in the public domain.
So now it's incumbent
on us scientists to
work and see what--
what we can figure
out with this.
-If you're not concerned or
interested in this, you're
simply uninformed.
[music playing]